.TH smix 1 "20 Feb 1998" "Release 2" "Linux System Manual"
.SH NAME
.I smix \- A Simple LINUX Mixer Program
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B smix 
[-v] [-h] [-o file] [-i file] [-m file] [-s] [command(s)] 
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I smix
, a simple mixer program that reports or
controls the Mixer settings of
.I /dev/mixer 
(or the specific mixer device file specified by the "-m file" option)
from the command line parameter(s).
.PP
The commands are detailed below, capitals showing the minimum abbreviation
allowed. Upper or lower case can be used on the command line. All Volume
settings are in range 0-100 (0 min, 100 max), but these are scaled to the
mixers actual range, hence set volume may be slightly different.
.PP
To see what devices/channels the mixer is configured with and to get 
a command summary, use 
.I smix\ -h
\.
.IP SHow\ or\ ALL
outputs the settings of the mixer. This is the default,
if no command line parameters are given
.IP dev
outputs the current settings for the mixer device named "dev"
.IP dev\ N\ or\ L,R
sets mixer device 'dev' to volume N, or to seperate
left and right stereo volume L,R
If device doesn't support stereo settings then max of L,R
is used. The word
.I off
can be used instead of 
.I 0
and
.I full 
can be used instead of 
.I 100.
.IP ALL\ N\ or\ L,R
sets all mixer devices to specified volume setting (see above).
.IP INput\ dev
set the DSP input to be 'dev' or 'NOne' to turn inputs off
.IP Verbose
makes the program output the settings after doing the
commands
.SH OPTIONS
.IP -h
show usage summary, which also lists the mixer devices and
the possible input devices.
.IP -v
be verbose - outputs the results of commands. Same as Verbose above
.IP -i\ file
read commands from file
.IP -o\ file      
divert standard output to file.
.IP -m\ file
use 
.I file
instead of the default /dev/mixer . The file has to be a valid mixer
device type.
.IP -s
causes smix to output mixer settings etc in a form that can be read
by smix to cause the same settings to set. This can be used to record the
settings of all or part of the mixer into a file, change the settings, then
get smix to reset the original settings by giving the file as an input file, 
see examples below.
.PP                   
Use '-' as a filename to indicate standard input.
.SH EXAMPLES
.IP smix
Displays the current mixer devices and their current settings.
.IP smix\ -m\ /dev/mixer1
Displays the devices and their current settings for /dev/mixer1
.IP smix\ input\ line1\ line1\ 60\ mic\ 0\ show
sets input to line1, line1 volume to 60 and mic volume to 0 (off)
and shows the total resultant mixer settings.
.IP smix\ line1\ 60,0\ show
sets left line1 input to volume 60 and right line1 input to 0 (off) and
shows the resultant output.
.IP smix\ -i\ /etc/mixer.default
set the mixer settings from smix commands in /etc/mixer.default .
.IP smix\ -i\ -
take mixer commands from stdin, with output to stdout. If stdin and stdout
is the keyboard and display, then mixer commands can by typed and executed
interactively and control is retained of the mixer while smix is running.
.IP smix\ -s\ -o\ mixer.conf
record the current settings of the default mixer in file 
.I mixer.conf
in a form that can be fed back in to smix.
.IP smix\ -i\ mixer.conf\ -o\ /dev/null
take the file saved, as above, and reset the mixer settings, without 
doing any output.
.SH OPTIONAL\ CONFIGURATION\ FILES
.PP
Three possible configuration files can be used: a LOCAL config file (usually
in current directory), a HOME config file in user's $HOME directory and a
GLOBAL config file.
.PP
All the siggen suite of programs are compiled with the names of the config
files built in. By default the configuration files are:
.IP ./.siggen.conf
is the LOCAL config file.
.IP $HOME/.siggen.conf
is the HOME config file.
.IP /etc/siggen.conf
is the GLOBAL config file.
.IP smix\ -h
will indicate which config files will be searched for.
.PP
The config files do not have to exist. If they exist and are readable by the
program they are used, otherwise they are simply ignored.
.PP
The config files are always searched for configuration values in the order
LOCAL, HOME, GLOBAL. This allows a scheme where the sysadmin sets up default
config values in the GLOBAL config file, but allows a user to set some or
all different values in their own HOME config file, and to set yet more
specific values when run from a particular directory.
.PP
If no configuration files exist, the program provides builtin
default values, and these values can be set
by appropriate command line options and flags.
.PP
See siggen.conf(5) for details of the configuration files.
.PP
.I smix
currently looks for configuration values MIXERFILE, VERBOSE.
.IP MIXERFILE
allows the name of the mixer device file to be changed from /dev/mixer
.IP VERBOSE
sets whether or not to run in verbose mode.

.SH
.SH SEE ALSO
.IP siggen.conf(5)
.PP
All the other mixer programs that float around the internet.
.SH BUGS
.SH
.SH COPYING
.I Copyright\ 1995-2008\ Jim\ Jackson
.PP
The software described by this manual is covered by the GNU General
Public License, Version 2, June 1991, issued by :
.IP
Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
.br
675 Mass Ave,
.br
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translation instead of in the original English.
.SH AUTHOR
.I Jim Jackson
.br
.sp
.I Email: jj@franjam.org.uk

.br
